Generating X12
==============

Stupidedi has a simple interface for generating X12 documents. Once you have
defined a transaction set or implementation guide (see [Defining](unwritten/Defining.md)) ,
you can generate well-formed documents using [`BuilderDsl`][1].

  [1]: Stupidedi/Builder/BuilderDsl.html

Configuration
-------------

Minimal configuration is needed so Stupidedi can load the correct definitions
and ensure well-formedness. The configuration below links interchange version
00501 to an instance of [`InterchangeDef`][2], the functional group version
005010 to an instance of [`FunctionalGroupDef`][3] and links the transaction set
(identified by three elements) to an instance of [`TransactionSetDef`][4].

  [2]: Stupidedi/Envelope/InterchangeDef.html
  [3]: Stupidedi/Envelope/FunctionalGroupDef.html
  [4]: Stupidedi/Envelope/TransactionSetDef.html

    config = Stupidedi::Config.new

    # Link the "00501" value in ISA12 element to the 5010 interchange definition
    config.interchange.register("00501") do
      Stupidedi::Versions::Interchanges::FiveOhOne::InterchangeDef
    end

    # Link the "005010" value in GS08 to the 5010 functional group definition
    config.functional_group.register("005010") do
      Stupidedi::Versions::FunctionalGroups::FiftyTen::FunctionalGroupDef
    end

    # Link "005010X222" in GS08 or ST03, "HC" in GS01, and "837"
    # in ST01 to the implementation guide definition
    config.transaction_set.register("005010X222", "HC", "837") do
      Stupidedi::Guides::FiftyTen::X222::HC837P
    end

    # Instantiate a new BuilderDsl
    b = Stupidedi::Builder::BuilderDsl.build(config)

[`InterchangeDef`][2] specifies which segments can occur directly in the
interchange envelope (e.g. `ISA` and `ISE`), the order in which they can occur,
and the definition of those segments.

[`FunctionalGroupDef`][3] specifies which segments can occur directly in the
functional group envelope (e.g. `GS` and `GE`), the order in which they occur,
and the definition of _every_ segment that can occur _inside_ the envelope.

[`TransactionSetDef`][4] specifies the structure of an X12 message, including
groupings of segments (e.g. tables and loops), and the order in which segments
and groups of segments may occur. The definition of each segment is given by the
parent [`FunctionalGroupDef`][3].

Generating a Segment
--------------------

The [`BuilderDsl`][1] API uses `method_missing` to dynamically respond to method
calls. If the method name matches the format of a segment identifier, a segment
is constructed and added to the parse tree. The arguments to the method call
should be the elements of the segment.

    b.ISA("00", "",             # authorization information
          "00", "",             # authentication information
          "ZZ", "SUBMITTER ID", # submitter identification
          "ZZ", "RECEIVER ID",  # recipient identification
          Time.now.utc,         # date
          Time.now.utc,         # time
          "^",                  # repetition separator
          "00501",              # interchange version
          "333666999",          # control number
          "1",                  # acknowledgement request
          "T",                  # usage indicator
          ":")                  # component separator

> _Note_: The repetition separator "&#136;" and component separator ":" have no
> special meaning when generating X12. These elements are only meaningful to
> Stupidedi when parsing X12 from an input stream (see
> [Parsing X12](Parsing.html)).

Alternatively, the [`#segment!`][5] method can be used to avoid the method
lookup overhead incurred by `method_missing`.

  [5]: Stupidedi/Builder/BuilderDsl.html#segment!-instance_method

### Simple Elements

Simple elements of _any_ type can be constructed from Strings (this is how X12
is parsed from a file), but certain element types can be constructed from other
types of Ruby values.

The description of each element type below pertains to the `FiftyTen` functional
group definition. The [`SimpleElementDef`][7] and [`SimpleElementVal`][8] classes
define the minimal interfaces that are extended by subclasses like `AN` and
`StringVal`. See the [`FiftyTen::ElementTypes`][6] namespace for more examples.

  [6]: Stupidedi/Versions/FunctionalGroups/FiftyTen/ElementTypes.html
  [7]: Stupidedi/Schema/SimpleElementDef.html
  [8]: Stupidedi/Values/SimpleElementVal.html

#### Strings

String elements (declared with type `AN`) can be constructed from any value that
responds to `#to_s`. The constructed element is a [`StringVal`][9].

  [9]: Stupidedi/Versions/FunctionalGroups/FiftyTen/ElementTypes/StringVal.html

#### Identifiers

Identifier elements (declared with type `ID`) can be constructed from any value
that responds to `#to_s`. The constructed element is an [`IdentifierVal`][10].

  [10]: Stupidedi/Versions/FunctionalGroups/FiftyTen/ElementTypes/IdentifierVal.html

#### Dates

Date elements (declared with type `DT`) can be constructed from a `String` of
either six or eight characters, and from any value that responds to `#year`,
`#month`, and `#day`. This includes the `Date`, `Time`, and `DateTime` classes
included with the standard Ruby libraries. The constructed element is a
[`DateVal`][11].

  [11]: Stupidedi/Versions/FunctionalGroups/FiftyTen/ElementTypes/DateVal.html

#### Times

Time elements (declared with type `TM`) can be constructed from a `String` of
either two, four, six, or more than six characters, and from the `Time` and
`DateTime` value types. The constructed element is a [`TimeVal`][12].

  [12]: Stupidedi/Versions/FunctionalGroups/FiftyTen/ElementTypes/TimeVal.html

#### Numbers

Numeric and decimal elements (declared with type `Nn` and `R`, respectively) can
be constructed from any value that responds to `#to_d`. The constructed element
is a [`FixnumVal`][13] or [`FloatVal`][14].

  [13]: Stupidedi/Versions/FunctionalGroups/FiftyTen/ElementTypes/FixnumVal.html
  [14]: Stupidedi/Versions/FunctionalGroups/FiftyTen/ElementTypes/FloatVal.html

### Composite Elements

Composite elements are constructed with the [`#composite`][24] method. The
constructed element is a [`CompositeElementVal`][15]. Arguments to the method
call should be the component elements. For instance, to generate an `HI` segment
with three composite elements:

    b.HI(b.composite("ABK", "7868"),
         b.composite("ABF", "052"),
         b.composite("ABF", "E9283"))

  [15]: Stupidedi/Values/CompositeElementVal.html

### Repeated Elements

Repeated elements are constructed using the [`#repeated`][25] method. The
constructed element is a [`RepeatedElementVal`][16]. The arguments to the method
call should be either all simple elements or all composite elements, according
to the element definition.

    b.AK9(b.repeated("R", "X", "E"), 1, 1, 0)

    b.IK4(b.repeated(
            b.composite(3, 1),
            b.composite(4)),
          1068, 7, "B")

  [16]: Stupidedi/Values/RepeatedElementVal.html

Element Placeholders
--------------------

Because [`BuilderDsl`][1] builds a parse tree as segments are generated, it can
infer and validate certain information about the elements in a segment.

### Blank Elements

Blank elements (simple, composite, and repeated) can be generated from a `nil`
argument, but you can improve readability by using [`#blank`][26], and
no-argument calls to [`#composite`][24] and [`#repeated`][25]. These are
arguably more self-documenting.

    b.AK9(nil, 1, 1, 0)
    b.AK9(b.repeated, 1, 1, 0)

    b.HI(nil, b.composite(b.blank, "052"))
    b.HI(b.composite, b.composite(b.blank, "052"))

Also, if fewer than the defined number of elements are given as arguments, the
missing arguments generate blank elements. For example, the following statements
both generate the same segment.

    b.ST("835", "1234")
    b.ST("835", "1234", b.blank)

### Default Elements

Certain elements are declared with a single value in [`#allowed_values`][18].
These are usually qualifier elements, like `NM103`, whose value adds little
readability. These values can be inferred by [`BuilderDsl`][1] when the
[`#default`][27] placeholder is used. For example, when generating the X222 837P
the following statements generate the same segment.

    b.BHT("0019", "00", control_number, Time.now.utc, Time.now.utc, "CH")

    b.BHT(b.default, "00", control_number, Time.now.utc, Time.now.utc, "CH")

When a default value cannot be inferred, a [`ParseError`][17] is thrown. Note
that repeated and composite elements can only be generated by [`#default`][27],
when they are declared `NOT USED`.

  [17]: Stupidedi/Exceptions/ParseError.html
  [18]: Stupidedi/Schema/SimpleElementUse.html#allowed_values-instance_method

### Unused Elements

For elements that are declared to never be sent, `nil` or [`#blank`][26] will
generate the empty element; however using [`#not_used`][28] is arguably more
self-documenting. If [`BuilderDsl`][1] determines that the element is not
declared as such, it will raise a [`ParseError`][17]. For example the X221 835
document declares ST03 with `NOT USED`:

    b.ST("835", "1234", b.not_used)

Syntax Validation
-----------------

The parse tree that [`BuilderDsl`][1] maintains is used to ensure only
well-formed X12 is generated. This means segments occur in the correct order
and have the correct number and type of elements.

### Segment Order

The order in which segments may occur is defined by the active
[`TransactionSetDef`][4], [`FunctionalGroupDef`][3], and [`InterchangeDef`][2].
Internally, an instance of [`StateMachine`][19] is used to both
incrementally build the parse tree and keep track of which segments can occur
from the given state. The [`#successors`][21] method will return one or more
[`InstructionTable`][20] values which enumerate the segments that may occur in
the current state:

    pp b.successors

    [InstructionTable(
      1: Instruction[REF: Subscriber Secon..](pop: 0, drop: 0),
      2: Instruction[REF: Property and Cas..](pop: 0, drop: 0),
      3: Instruction[PER: Property and Cas..](pop: 0, drop: 3),
      4: Instruction[NM1: Subscriber Name   ](pop: 1, drop: 0, push: LoopState),
      5: Instruction[NM1: Payer Name        ](pop: 1, drop: 0, push: LoopState),
      6: Instruction[CLM: Claim Informatio..](pop: 1, drop: 2, push: LoopState),
      7: Instruction[ HL: Subscriber Hiera..](pop: 2, drop: 0, push: LoopState),
      8: Instruction[ HL: Billing Provider..](pop: 3, drop: 0, push: TableState),
      9: Instruction[ HL: Subscriber Hiera..](pop: 3, drop: 0, push: TableState),
     10: Instruction[ HL: Patient Hierachi..](pop: 3, drop: 0, push: TableState),
     11: Instruction[ SE: Transaction Set ..](pop: 3, drop: 4, push: TableState),
     12: Instruction[ ST](pop: 4, drop: 0, push: TransactionSetState),
     13: Instruction[ GE: Functional Group..](pop: 4, drop: 2),
     14: Instruction[ GS](pop: 5, drop: 0, push: FunctionalGroupState),
     15: Instruction[IEA: Interchange Cont..](pop: 5, drop: 2),
     16: Instruction[ISA](pop: 6, drop: 0, push: InterchangeState))]

  [19]: Stupidedi/Builder/StateMachine.html
  [20]: Stupidedi/Builder/InstructionTable.html
  [21]: Stupidedi/Builder/BuilderDsl.html#successors-instance_method

The above output pertains to the X222 837 implementation guide. The output shows
a single active [`InstructionTable`][20] and the segments it is able to accept.
For more information about how the parser works, see {file:design/Parser.md Parser Design}.
Attempting to generate a segment that is not a member of at least one of the
instruction tables will cause a [`ParseError`][17] to be raised.

    b.N3("SUITE 111", "1234 OCEAN BLVD")
      #=> Segment N3 cannot occur here (Stupidedi::Exceptions::ParseError)

### Element Types

The [`InterchangeDef`][2] and [`TransactionSetDef`][4] classes both respond to
`#segment_dict`, which allows looking up a [`SegmentDef`][23] by segment its
identifier. The [`SegmentDef`][23] indicates the number of elements and their
types (composite, repeated, simple).  This information allows [`BuilderDsl`][1]
to raise a [`ParseError`][17] on the following conditions:

  [23]: Stupidedi/Schema/SegmentDef.html

Generating a composite element where a simple or repeated element is defined:

    b.NM1(b.composite(nil, "B"), nil)
      #=> NM101 is a simple element (Stupidedi::Exceptions::ParseError)

Generating a simple element where a repeated or composite element is defined:

    b.REF(nil, nil, nil, "D")
      #=> REF04 is a composite element (Stupidedi::Exceptions::ParseError)

    b.DMG(nil, nil, nil, nli, "E")
      #=> DMG05 is a repeatable element (Stupiedi::Exceptions::ParseError)

    b.DMG(nil, nil, nil, nil, b.repeated("E"))
      #=> DMG05 is a composite element (Stupidedi::Exceptions::ParseError)

Generating a repeated element where a non-repeated element is defined:

    b.NM1(b.repeated("A", "B"))
      #=> NM101 is a simple element (Stupidedi::Exceptions::ParseError)

Generating more than the defined number of elements:

    b.N3(nil, nil, nil)
      #=> N3 has only 4 elements (Stupidedi::Exceptions::ParseError)

    b.REF(nil, nil, nil, b.composite("A", "B", "C", "D", "E", "F", "G"))
      #=> REF04 has only 6 components (Stupidedi::Exceptions::ParseError)

  [24]: Stupidedi/Builder/BuilderDsl.html#composite-instance_method
  [25]: Stupidedi/Builder/BuilderDsl.html#repeated-instance_method
  [26]: Stupidedi/Builder/BuilderDsl.html#blank-instance_method
  [27]: Stupidedi/Builder/BuilderDsl.html#default-instance_method
  [28]: Stupidedi/Builder/BuilderDsl.html#not_used-instance_method
